gh-135944: Add a "Runtime Components" Section to the Execution Model Docs (#135945)
python/cpython: Doc/reference/executionmodel.rst

interpreters, and thread states.  The runtime ensures all that state
stays consistent over its lifetime, particularly when used with
multiple host threads.

The global runtime, at the conceptual level, is just a set of
interpreters.  While those interpreters are otherwise isolated and
independent from one another, they may share some data or other
resources.  The runtime is responsible for managing these global
resources safely.  The actual nature and management of these resources
is implementation-specific.  Ultimately, the external utility of the
global runtime is limited to managing interpreters.

In contrast, an "interpreter" is conceptually what we would normally
think of as the (full-featured) "Python runtime".  When machine code
executing in a host thread interacts with the Python runtime, it calls
into Python in the context of a specific interpreter.

.. note::

   The term "interpreter" here is not the same as the "bytecode
   interpreter", which is what regularly runs in threads, executing
   compiled Python code.

   In an ideal world, "Python runtime" would refer to what we currently
   call "interpreter".  However, it's been called "interpreter" at least

>    since introduced in 1997 (CPython:a027efa5b).

Reviewer: Should that be a Github source link?

Author: Good idea.

Author: fixed

state includes the current raised exception and the thread's Python
call stack.  It may include other thread-specific resources.

.. note::

   The term "Python thread" can sometimes refer to a thread state, but
   normally it means a thread created using the :mod:`threading` module.

Each thread state, over its lifetime, is always tied to exactly one
interpreter and exactly one host thread.  It will only ever be used in
that thread and with that interpreter.

Multiple thread states may be tied to the same host thread, whether for
different interpreters or even the same interpreter.  However, for any
given host thread, only one of the thread states tied to it can be used
by the thread at a time.

Thread states are isolated and independent from one another and don't
share any data, except for possibly sharing an interpreter and objects
or other resources belonging to that interpreter.

Once a program is running, new Python threads can be created using the
:mod:`threading` module (on platforms and Python implementations that
support threads).  Additional processes can be created using the
:mod:`os`, :mod:`subprocess`, and :mod:`multiprocessing` modules.

> You can run coroutines (async) in the main thread using :mod:`asyncio`.

Reviewer: Event loops can run in any thread, not just the main thread.

Author: Fair enough.  Technically, what I said doesn't exclude running them in other threads. :)  I'll broaden the statement.

Author: fixed

and :keyword:`raise` statement in section :ref:`raise`.

.. _execcomponents:

> Runtime Components

Reviewer 2: I think it would be a good idea to mention that this is CPython specific. Other implementations are allowed to have different runtime models.

Reviewer 2: > This is meant to be implementation agnostic

Oh, oops, didn't see this. Some parts are CPython specific here, though.

Author: I'm trying to avoid any CPython-specific notions here.  Do you have an example of another runtime model?

Reviewer 2: No, I'm not familiar with how any other implementations work, this is coming solely off a bit of speculation on my part. My concern is that a thread is inherently CPython-specific, because some Python implementations exist in areas that don't have access to OS threads, such as Brython for JS, and probably MicroPython/CircuitPython for some microcontrollers.

I do think that this is a great section to have for subinterpreters, I just think it'd be better to keep some parts of it CPython specific. Does that make sense?

Author: From a conceptual standpoint, which is the level of this text, threads are not implementation-specific (or platform-specific): the Python runtime always deals with at least the one thread in which it was started.  Not all platforms and implementations support multiple threads, but that's a different matter.  I'll add a sentence clarifying that point.

Reviewer 2: Ok, I think I can get behind that. Thanks!

Author: fixed

Reviewer 3: On the question of implementations that do not have access to OS threads, unless they are unable to create Thread objects, I think this is covered by the possibility of multiple Python threads may be mapped to the single OS thread available. I'm assuming this is multiple Python threads in one interpreter, but interested to be reassured about the multiplicity of the relationships in this data model. I'm reading "OS thread" as "JVM Thread" for my purposes. It's not necessarily the same, but I don't think we can/should peek behind that particular abstraction.

Author: Would it make sense to call them "native" threads instead of "OS" threads?

Reviewer 2: I generally refer to a thread created in a C extension as a "native thread", but I've received pushback on that terminology before. I'm fine with either.

Author: Looks like in the Java world, "native thread" has a specific meaning that is distinct from a Java thread.  I'll think of something, but I probably won't leave it "OS thread".

==================

Python's execution model does not operate in a vacuum.  It runs on a
computer.  When a program runs, the conceptual layers of how it runs
on the computer look something like this::

   host computer (or VM or container)
     process
       OS thread (runs machine code)

.. (Sometimes there may even be an extra layer right after "thread"
   for light-weight threads or coroutines.)

While a program always starts with exactly one of each of those, it may
grow to include multiple of each.  Hosts and processes are isolated and

> independent from one another.  However, threads are not.  Each thread

Reviewer 2: There should probably be some mention of the GIL here.

Author: The GIL is an implementation detail rather than a part of the language, so I'd rather not mention it in the language reference.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, this was an extension to my previous comment.

does *run* independently, for the small segments of time it is
scheduled to execute its code on the CPU.  Otherwise, all threads
in a process share all the process' resources, including memory.
This is exactly what can make threads a pain: two threads running
at the same arbitrary time on different CPU cores can accidentally
interfere with each other's use of some shared data.  The initial
thread is known as the "main" thread.

The same layers apply to each Python program, with some extra layers
specific to Python::

   host
     process
       Python runtime
         interpreter
           Python thread (runs bytecode)

> when a Python program starts, it looks exactly like that, with one

Reviewer 4: capitalization: When

Author: fixed

of each.  The process has a single global runtime to manage global
resources.  Each Python thread has all the state it needs to run
Python code (and use any supported C-API) in its OS thread.

.. , including its stack of call frames.

.. If the program uses coroutines (async) then the thread will end up
   juggling multiple stacks.

In between the global runtime and the threads lies the interpreter.
It encapsulates all of the non-global runtime state that the
interpreter's Python threads share.  For example, all those threads
share :data:`sys.modules`.  When a Python thread is created, it belongs
to an interpreter.

> If the runtime supports using multiple interpreters then each OS thread
> will have at most one Python thread for each interpreter.  However,
> only one is active in the OS thread at a time.  Switching between
> interpreters means changing the active Python thread.

Reviewer 4: Probably I'm misreading:

```suggestion
If the runtime supports using multiple interpreters then each OS thread
will have at least one Python thread for each interpreter.  However,
only one is active in the OS thread at a time.  Switching between
interpreters in the current OS thread means changing the active Python thread.
```

Author: It's "at most" because there may be zero or one Python thread per thread per interpreter.  However, that isn't strictly true, since you can create as many thread states as you want.  Only one can be active at a time for a give thread and each one is strictly bound to a single thread.  I'll tweak the wording.  Thanks for pointing this out.

Author: fixed

and :keyword:`raise` statement in section :ref:`raise`.

.. _execcomponents:

Runtime Components
==================

Python's execution model does not operate in a vacuum.  It runs on a
computer.  When a program runs, the conceptual layers of how it runs
on the computer look something like this::

   host computer (or VM or container)
     process
       OS thread (runs machine code)

While a program always starts with exactly one of each of those, it may
grow to include multiple of each.  Hosts and processes are isolated and
independent from one another.  However, threads are not.

> 

Reviewer 3: This falls a little oddly: "multiples of each". Threads, sure. But to say that a (Python) program could grow to include multiple hosts or processes would take a more extended idea of "program" than I think the execution model seeks to address. Wouldn't it?

Author: Good point.  I'll narrow that.

Author: fixed

Not all platforms support threads, though most do.  For those that do,
each thread does *run* independently, for the small segments of time it
is scheduled to execute its code on the CPU.  Otherwise, all threads
in a process share all the process' resources, including memory.
The initial thread is known as the "main" thread.

.. note::

   The way they share resources is exactly what can make threads a pain:
   two threads running at the same arbitrary time on different CPU cores
   can accidentally interfere with each other's use of some shared data.

> 

Reviewer 3: This sounds a bit like the risk of accidents is unavoidable. Though I take your point, some science is available, so I offer: "The care needed to co-ordinate access to intentionally shared data, when two or more threads could be running, is exactly what makes threads a painful way to exploit the potential concurrence of multiple CPUs."

Author: Arguably, the risk of accidents with threads *is* unavoidable. 😄  That said, I'll clarify similarly to what you've suggested.

Author: fixed

Reviewer 3: Sorry, I've driven you to use a lot of words. I'm not as pessinistic as this about threads, but won't claim correctness comes easy. You're the editor.

Author: That's okay.  I tend toward verbosity. 😄  In this case, I guess I've spent so much time over the last 5-7 years dealing with thread-related bugs that my perspective has been affected aversely.  I end up wanting to shout warnings from the roof tops.

The same layers apply to each Python program, with some extra layers
specific to Python::

   host
     process
       Python runtime
         interpreter
           Python thread (runs bytecode)

When a Python program starts, it looks exactly like that, with one
of each.  The process has a single global runtime to manage Python's
process-global resources.  Each Python thread has all the state it needs
to run Python code (and use any supported C-API) in its OS thread.
Depending on the implementation, this probably includes the current
exception and the Python call stack.

In between the global runtime and the thread(s) lies the interpreter.
It completely encapsulates all of the non-process-global runtime state
that the interpreter's Python threads share.  For example, all its
threads share :data:`sys.modules`.  Every Python thread belongs to a

> single interpreter and runs using that shared state.  The initial

Reviewer 3: I think your point, providing an important example of this encapsulation, is:
all its threads share :data:`sys.modules`, but each interpreter will manage its own :data:`sys.modules` independently.

Author: fixed

interpreter is known as the "main" interpreter, and the initial thread,
where the runtime was initialized, is known as the "main" thread.

.. note::

   The interpreter here is not the same as the "bytecode interpreter",
   which is what runs in each thread, executing compiled Python code.

Every Python thread is associated with a single OS thread, which is
where it runs.  However, multiple Python threads can be associated with

> the same OS thread.  For example, an OS thread might run code with a

Reviewer 3: We haven't precluded, but haven't expicitly mentioned, one OS thread associated with multiple Python threads in the same interepreter.

Author: There's no prohibition.  You're right that it's worth pointing out explicitly.

Author: fixed

first interpreter and then with a second, each necessarily with its own
Python thread.  Still, regardless of how many are *associated* with
an OS thread, only one Python thread can be actively *running* in
an OS thread at a time.  Switching between interpreters means

> changing the active Python thread.

Reviewer 3: "... for that particular OS thread."

Actually, the use of two terms may be why I feel like adding words. If "active" and "running" mean the same thing, I would say choose one. If there is an important distinction, it's not clear. Should we maybe refer to the (one) active Python thread, in each interpreter, for a given OS thread. That may or may not be running as far as the OS is concerned (if that even matters to us).

Author: Yeah, this is the part where it was hardest to get the wording right.  I'll clarify.

Reviewer 3: Agree. Looking back, I realise the relevant state of an OS thread is "runnable", rather than "running". We don't care whether the OS thread is actually running, only whether it might make progress "without asking" or is properly blocked. But I struggle to understand how this is in CPython, relates to thread state, and what part of that is implementation-neutral.

Author: fixed (hopefullly) -- let me know what you think of the updated text
